train_model_optuna_README.md, before:

# README for Hyperparameter Optimization Script

## Overview

This script performs **hyperparameter optimization** for training models that generate embeddings from RNA secondary structures. It uses **Optuna**, a state-of-the-art hyperparameter optimization framework, to minimize validation loss by tuning hyperparameters. The script supports two model types: **Siamese ResNet-LSTM** and **GIN (Graph Isomorphism Network)**.

---

## Features

- **Model Support**:
  - **Siamese ResNet-LSTM**: Sequence-based RNA embeddings.
  - **GIN**: Graph-based RNA embeddings with `standard` or `forgi` graph encoding.
- **Hyperparameter Optimization**: Optimizes:
  - Hidden dimension size
  - Output dimension size
  - Learning rate
  - Number of GIN layers
- **Early Stopping**: Stops training if validation loss does not improve for a specified number of epochs.
- **Logging**: Logs trial parameters, progress, and best results.

---

## Prerequisites

### Libraries

Install the following Python libraries:

- `torch`
- `torch_geometric`
- `optuna`
- `pandas`
- `scikit-learn`
- `tqdm`

Install missing dependencies with:

```bash
pip install torch optuna pandas scikit-learn tqdm
```

For `torch_geometric`, follow the [installation guide](https://pytorch-geometric.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notes/installation.html).

---

## Usage

### Command-line Arguments

Run the script as follows:

```bash
python optimize_hyperparameters.py --input_path <path_to_input_file> --model_type <siamese|gin> [options]
```

#### **Required Arguments**
- `--input_path`: Path to the input CSV/TSV file containing RNA secondary structures with `structure_A`, `structure_P`, and `structure_N` columns.
- `--model_type`: Model type to use (`siamese` or `gin`).

#### **Optional Arguments**
- `--optimisation_id`: Identifier for the optimization run (default: `gin_optimisation`).
- `--n_trials`: Number of Optuna trials to run (default: `50`).
- `--graph_encoding`: Graph encoding type for GIN model (`standard` or `forgi`, default: `forgi`).
- `--batch_size`: Batch size for training and validation (default: `100`).
- `--num_epochs`: Number of epochs for training (default: `1`).
- `--patience`: Patience for early stopping (default: `5`).
- `--hidden_dim`: Fixed hidden dimension size. If not provided, it will be optimized.
- `--output_dim`: Fixed output embedding size. If not provided, it will be optimized.
- `--lr`: Fixed learning rate. If not provided, it will be optimized.
- `--gin_layers`: Fixed number of GIN layers. If not provided, it will be optimized.

---

## Input Data Format

The input file must be a CSV/TSV with columns `structure_A`, `structure_P`, and `structure_N` containing RNA secondary structures in dot-bracket notation.

### Example File

| ID  | structure_A       | structure_P       | structure_N       |
|-----|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
| 1   | ..((..))..        | ..((..))..        | ..(((...)))..     |
| 2   | ..(((...)))..     | ..(((...)))..     | ..((..))..        |

---

## Outputs

1. **Model Checkpoints**: Saved to `output/<optimisation_id>/<optimisation_id>_<timestamp>.pth`.
2. **Logs**: Logs training progress, parameters, and best trial details to `output/<optimisation_id>/run_<timestamp>.log`.
3. **Best Trial**: Reports the best hyperparameter configuration.

---

## Example Commands

### Optimize a Siamese Model
```bash
python optimize_hyperparameters.py --input_path data/rna_structures.csv --model_type siamese --n_trials 100
```

### Optimize a GIN Model with Fixed Hyperparameters
```bash
python optimize_hyperparameters.py --input_path data/rna_structures.csv --model_type gin --hidden_dim 256 --output_dim 64 --gin_layers 3 --lr 0.001
```

### Optimize GIN Model with Variable Hyperparameters
```bash
python optimize_hyperparameters.py --input_path data/rna_structures.csv --model_type gin --n_trials 50
```

---

## How It Works

1. **Input Validation**:
   - Ensures all RNA secondary structures in the dataset are valid dot-bracket strings.

2. **Define Objective Function**:
   - The script defines an Optuna objective function that:
     - Samples hyperparameters (e.g., `hidden_dim`, `output_dim`, `lr`, `gin_layers`).
     - Loads data and splits it into training and validation sets.
     - Trains the model with early stopping and returns the validation loss.

3. **Optimize Hyperparameters**:
   - Optuna runs the objective function for the specified number of trials (`--n_trials`) and identifies the best hyperparameter configuration.

4. **Save Results**:
   - Saves the model and logs the best trial details.

---

## Notes

- **GPU Support**: The script will automatically use a GPU if available. Otherwise, it defaults to CPU.
- **Custom Hyperparameter Ranges**: Modify the `trial.suggest_*` calls in the `objective` function to change the range of hyperparameters to optimize.
- **Extensibility**: You can extend the script to include new models or additional hyperparameters.

Commit message:

Remove siamese and clean code for its parameters

train_model_optuna_README.md, after:

# README for GIN Model Hyperparameter Optimization

## Overview

This script performs hyperparameter optimization for training Graph Isomorphism Network (GIN) models that generate embeddings from RNA secondary structures. It uses Optuna to minimize validation loss by tuning the model's hyperparameters.

## Features

- **GIN Model Optimization**: Tune parameters for graph-based RNA embeddings
- **Graph Encoding Options**: Support for 'standard' and 'forgi' encodings
- **Hyperparameter Optimization**: Optimizes:
  - Hidden dimension size
  - Output dimension size
  - Learning rate
  - Number of GIN layers
- **Early Stopping**: Stops training if validation loss does not improve for a specified number of epochs.
- **Logging**: Logs trial parameters, progress, and best results.

---

## Prerequisites

### Libraries

Install the following Python libraries:

- `torch`
- `torch_geometric`
- `optuna`
- `pandas`
- `scikit-learn`
- `tqdm`

Install missing dependencies with:

```bash
pip install torch optuna pandas scikit-learn tqdm
```

For `torch_geometric`, follow the [installation guide](https://pytorch-geometric.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notes/installation.html).

---

## Usage

### Command-line Arguments

Run the script as follows:

```bash
python optimize_hyperparameters.py --input_path <path_to_input_file> --model_type <gin> [options]
```

#### **Required Arguments**
- `--input_path`: Path to the input CSV/TSV file containing RNA secondary structures with `structure_A`, `structure_P`, and `structure_N` columns.
- `--model_type`: Model type to use (`gin`).

#### **Optional Arguments**
- `--optimisation_id`: Identifier for the optimization run (default: `gin_optimisation`).
- `--n_trials`: Number of Optuna trials to run (default: `50`).
- `--graph_encoding`: Graph encoding type for GIN model (`standard` or `forgi`, default: `forgi`).
- `--batch_size`: Batch size for training and validation (default: `100`).
- `--num_epochs`: Number of epochs for training (default: `1`).
- `--patience`: Patience for early stopping (default: `5`).
- `--hidden_dim`: Fixed hidden dimension size. If not provided, it will be optimized.
- `--output_dim`: Fixed output embedding size. If not provided, it will be optimized.
- `--lr`: Fixed learning rate. If not provided, it will be optimized.
- `--gin_layers`: Fixed number of GIN layers. If not provided, it will be optimized.

---

## Input Data Format

The input file must be a CSV/TSV with columns `structure_A`, `structure_P`, and `structure_N` containing RNA secondary structures in dot-bracket notation.

### Example File

| ID  | structure_A       | structure_P       | structure_N       |
|-----|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
| 1   | ..((..))..        | ..((..))..        | ..(((...)))..     |
| 2   | ..(((...)))..     | ..(((...)))..     | ..((..))..        |

---

## Outputs

1. **Model Checkpoints**: Saved to `output/<optimisation_id>/<optimisation_id>_<timestamp>.pth`.
2. **Logs**: Logs training progress, parameters, and best trial details to `output/<optimisation_id>/run_<timestamp>.log`.
3. **Best Trial**: Reports the best hyperparameter configuration.

---

## Example Commands

### Optimize a GIN Model with Fixed Hyperparameters
```bash
python optimize_hyperparameters.py --input_path data/rna_structures.csv --model_type gin --hidden_dim 256 --output_dim 64 --gin_layers 3 --lr 0.001
```

### Optimize GIN Model with Variable Hyperparameters
```bash
python optimize_hyperparameters.py --input_path data/rna_structures.csv --model_type gin --n_trials 50
```

---

## How It Works

1. **Input Validation**:
   - Ensures all RNA secondary structures in the dataset are valid dot-bracket strings.

2. **Define Objective Function**:
   - The script defines an Optuna objective function that:
     - Samples hyperparameters (e.g., `hidden_dim`, `output_dim`, `lr`, `gin_layers`).
     - Loads data and splits it into training and validation sets.
     - Trains the model with early stopping and returns the validation loss.

3. **Optimize Hyperparameters**:
   - Optuna runs the objective function for the specified number of trials (`--n_trials`) and identifies the best hyperparameter configuration.

4. **Save Results**:
   - Saves the model and logs the best trial details.

---

## Notes

- **GPU Support**: The script will automatically use a GPU if available. Otherwise, it defaults to CPU.
- **Custom Hyperparameter Ranges**: Modify the `trial.suggest_*` calls in the `objective` function to change the range of hyperparameters to optimize.
- **Extensibility**: You can extend the script to include new models or additional hyperparameters.
